---
report: "scc"
path: "/scc/text/home"
date: "2018-02-20"
title: "Singapore No 1: The Singapore Cricket Club Excavation"
---
There are no do-overs in archaeological excavations. Once excavated, a site cannot be explored in the same way again. The data generated by an excavation is thus of crucial importance. “Preservation of archaeological research data is in essence the preservation of the archaeological site itself, and is critical not only for preserving, publicising, and verifying an individual researcher’s findings, but also to enable future research, and for responsible stewardship of cultural and historical heritage.”<span class="footnotecallout" footnote-data-id="1">1</span>

Publication of archaeological report data continues to be a challenging part of the scholarly publishing system. Archaeological reports are typically considered _grey literature_<span class="footnotecallout" footnote-data-id="2">2</span>, outside the more formal publication process of the peer-reviewed research monograph or journal articles, and so less well-integrated into bibliographic systems and measures. And crucially, much of the output generated by an archaeological excavation is in the form of data, amenable to analysis in a variety of ways, and in combination with external datasets.

This is the first of a projected series of archaeological site reports, from [NUS Press](https://nuspress.nus.edu.sg), working together with Professor John Miksic of the Southeast Asian Studies Department of NUS. The series is intended to make technical data available for comparative study to all scholars who work on Southeast Asian archaeology. Detailed site reports for Southeast Asia including stratigraphic drawings, site maps, the quantities of specific types of artifacts, illustrations of the main types of artifacts discovered, and laboratory analyses of mineral composition, identification of organic materials, the ancient environment, etc. are difficult or impossible to obtained for Southeast Asia.

The situation is somewhat better for prehistoric sites, but such information is almost completely lacking for archaeological sites formed during the historical period (the last 2,000 years). Without such information it is impossible to formulate detailed theories regarding the evolution of complex society in this region: the approximate date or period when particular developments appear in different parts of Southeast Asia, the stages in the evolution of such critical variables as settlement patterns, local and long-distance trade, local and regional art styles, metal working, boat construction, architecture, and the roles played by the environment and cross-cultural contact in determining the timing, sequence, and nature of such developments.

The first report in this series is devoted to a site of relatively modest proportions. This is by design; since the main medium by which these reports are designed to be disseminated is electronic, they can be updated, modified, and otherwise altered to adapt to the needs of the academic community as more sites are added, new typologies for artifacts and methods of organizing data are found to be significant, and new questions are posed. It is hoped that the use of this medium will enable scholars to communicate across political boundaries in order to foster regional collaboration.

This website is primarily a presentation website. For longer-term preservation the data will be archived in the National University of Singapore's institutional repository, [ScholarBank@NUS](https://scholarbank.nus.edu.sg).

Our first archaeological report is a report by John Miksic and colleagues on the Singapore Cricket Club excavation, conducted in 2003. Development and hosting of this report was funded by the National Heritage Board.

<div class="footnote" data-footnote-id="1">Beth Sheehan (2015) Comparing Digital Archaeological Repositories: tDAR Versus Open Context, _Behavioral & Social Sciences Librarian,_ 34:4, 173-213, DOI: 10.1080/01639269.2015.1096155</div>

<div class="footnote" data-footnote-id="2">See the Pisa Declaration on Grey Literature, <<http://greyguide.isti.cnr.it/pisa-declaration/>>, accessed on Feb 19, 2018.</div>
