**The Temasek Wreck**

**Blue-and-White Porcelain Distribution and Composition -- Rev.2**

**By Dr Michael Flecker**

**Introduction**

The *Temasek Wreck* was lost on Pedra Branca, a rock outcrop at the
eastern entrance of Singapore Strait. Her surviving cargo of Chinese
ceramics comprised blue-and-white, *qingbai* and *shufu* porcelain from
the kilns of Jingdezhen in Jiangxi Province; Longquan celadon from
Zhejiang Province; stoneware from Cizao in Fujian Province; greenware
that was probably also from Fujian kilns, and Dehua whiteware.

The very few non-ceramic artefacts included glass beads, gold foil,
wrought iron, lead ingots, and a few copper-alloy objects. All organic
cargo rotted away long ago, as did the entire ship's structure. Without
any hull remains it is impossible to conclusively identify the type of
ship. However, from circumstantial evidence such as an exclusive Chinese
cargo and an absence of non-Chinese artefacts, there is a high
probability that the ship was a Chinese junk.

Notably, the *Temasek Wreck* contains more Yuan blue-and-white porcelain
than any other documented shipwreck in the world, with over 2,100 shards
weighing 130 kg having been documented, along with a handful of intact
or nearly intact objects. In comparison, the *Binh Chau Wreck*, a
Chinese junk lost in Vietnam, contained a few Yuan blue-and-white bowls,
cups, dishes, and covers. Only 103 blue-and-white shards were recovered
from the *Shiyu 2 Wreck*, which was lost in the Paracels, although the
site was looted before official excavation. A mere nineteen large shards
were recovered from an undocumented wreck in the Red Sea, and just one
Yuan blue-and-white jar was lifted from a possible wreck off Samar in
the Philippines.

While the mass production of the other ceramic types was well
established, blue-and-white porcelain was not produced in quantity until
around 1330. It was a new creation that immediately found favour both in
China and internationally. The resultant extensive distribution
throughout Southeast Asia, India, the Middle East and the Maghreb belies
a very short production period, which is thought to have been terminated
in 1352 with the invasion of the Red Turban Army[^1]. An analysis of the
motifs on the blue-and-white porcelain from the *Temasek Wreck* strongly
suggests that their earliest production date is 1340, resulting in a
wreck date range of only 12 years. The most conservative range is 1330
to 1371, when the first Ming Emperor, Hongwu, banned commercial trade.

It is rare that a shipwreck with no historical documentation, and no
specifically dated artefacts, can be dated as precisely as this, even on
the more conservative level. Once all of the *Temasek Wreck* ceramics
have been cleaned and classified, and a detailed analysis of the many
ceramic types and designs is undertaken, an equally rare event may
occur: the *Temasek Wreck* finds, which mark one moment in history, may
contribute to the accurate dating of Yuan blue-and-white porcelain.

From the location of the wreck, the many parallel finds, and importantly
a common dearth of large blue-and-white plates which were prized in the
Ottoman Empire, the greater Middle East and India, it seems that Temasek
(14th century Singapore) was the most likely intended destination of
the *Temasek Wreck*. This being the case, the recovered ceramics and
artefacts provide an incredible insight into the utilitarian, elite, and
ceremonial wares that were either used by the inhabitants or
re-exported. And because the wide variety of *Temasek Wreck* ceramics
was lost at a specific moment in the 14th century they can be
particularly helpful in interpreting the Temasek era stratigraphy as
revealed in past and future terrestrial excavations in Singapore.

For a detailed report on the *Temasek Wreck*, covering the discovery,
survey, excavation, wrecking process, artefact overview, Temasek
parallels, dating, likely vessel type, likely port of lading, and likely
destination, refer to The "Temasek Wreck (Mid-14th Century),
Singapore: Preliminary Report"[^2].

**The Database**

This report deals with a specific element of the ceramics cargo, the
Yuan dynasty blue-and-white porcelain. The Database presented here
records every blue-and-white piece recovered from the wreck, from intact
and nearly intact objects to tiny shards. Virtually every shard was
coral encrusted, although the vivid hues of the blue-and-white could
generally be detected amongst the monochrome wares. Given the greater
significance of the blue-and-white, it was tagged and bagged separately
on board the dive support vessel. These bags have been prioritised in
the cleaning, desalination and cataloguing process. As a number of
shards were completely encased in coral, some blue-and-white has ended
up with the nearly four tonnes of additional ceramics. While all have
now been cleaned and desalinated, the hidden blue-and-white shards will
only be discovered when the bags are systematically opened for
cataloguing, a process that is well underway but will take some years to
complete.

It is estimated that at least 98% of the blue-and-white porcelain from
the *Temasek Wreck* has so far been catalogued, which is more than
enough for meaningful statistical analysis. Analysis comes in two forms:
a distribution analysis which examines the spatial arrangement of the
ceramics at the time of excavation; and a compositional analysis which
determines the proportion of each ceramic shape and/or decoration in the
cargo.

The blue-and-white porcelain Database is a subset of the *Temasek Wreck*
Ceramics Database. Some of the database fields are constant for
blue-and-white porcelain while others are not. The fields are:

**Unique Identification Number (UIN)** The UIN may be allocated to a
single artefact or to a group of artefacts with the same Grid, Batch
Number, and characteristics that form a single record in the Database.
The UIN is sequential from lowest to highest. Gaps in the numbering are
for non-blue-and-white ceramics that do not appear in this Database.

**Grid** The wreck site was divided into Grid squares measuring 5 x 5
metres, each with a unique alphanumeric designation. This locational
information is fundamental for determining artefact distribution, which
in turn reflects on the wrecking process.

**Batch Number** One or more Batch Numbers were allocated for each day
on site. Each Batch Number corresponds to a Grid, a date, and a dive
number (and hence the divers that excavated a particular artefact).

**Glaze Type** For this database the Glaze Type is always blue-and-white
(B&W), apart from rare examples of red-and-white (R&W) porcelain, which
are of the same style and were made in the same kiln complex, and are
therefore included in this Database.

**Kiln** For this database the Kiln is always Jingdezhen.

**Material** For this database the Material is always Porcelain.

**Description** Description here refers to the shape and/or type of
object, i.e. bowl, cup, dish, jar (guan), jarlet, vase, etc.

**Size** The so-called size is not an overall descriptor but is only
related to other objects of the same Description, i.e. bowls may be
small, medium, large or very large but only with respect to each other.

**Weight** Weight refers to the combined weight of all artefacts in the
one record.

**Quantity** Quantity is the number of artefacts occurring in the one
record.

**Condition** Condition is 'shard' (or 'shards') for the vast majority
of artefacts. Other terms reflect on the type of shard, i.e. 'base' for
complete footring, 'base shard' for part of a footring, 'rim shard',
etc. Some of the more complete pieces will have their degree of
completeness recorded as a fraction.

**Decoration External** Decoration is typically the subject of the blue
painting, 'ducks in a lotus pond' being the most prevalent. There may be
several themes on one object, including 'scrolls' and 'lotus panels'.
External typically refers to the convex side of an object, i.e. the
outside of a bowl, dish, jar, etc.

**Decoration Internal** As above but Internal typically refers to the
concave side of an object, i.e. the inside of a bowl or dish. Closed
shapes such as jars and vases do not have internal decorations.

**Remarks** Remarks covers anything out of the ordinary, that is not
sufficiently covered by any of the other prescribed fields.

**Image 1** Each record has two images imbedded in the Database. Image 1
typically shows the most significant side of an object, i.e. the inside
of a bowl, or the outside of a vase.

**Image 2** Image 2 shows the less significant side of an object.

**Highlight** Highlight is either a ticked box, or a 'yes'. A tick or a
'yes' indicates that the particular record is rare and/or unusual, or of
higher quality than normal.

**Distribution Analysis**

Artefact distribution analysis is a fundamental part of maritime
archaeology. It is one of the primary tools used to determine cargo
stowage configuration and the wrecking process. The other primary tool
is the mapping of surviving hull remains. As there were no hull remains
whatsoever on the *Temasek Wreck* site, distribution analysis becomes
the only tool.

Until all the ceramics have been catalogued, the blue-and-white
porcelain must serve as a proxy. On a less disturbed wreck site, this
would not be valid. Higher value cargo was usually better packed, more
securely stowed, and positioned in the least vulnerable cargo space. It
is therefore not representative of the cargo as a whole. As it turns
out, the dynamic nature of the *Temasek Wreck* site has all but
eliminated the influence of such variations. With nearly 700 years of
strong currents acting in tandem with monsoon waves in shallow water,
the ceramics cargo has been smashed to pieces and spread far, but not
wide. Interestingly, the shards have scattered over 70 metres in a
north-northeast / south-southwest orientation. And yet the width of this
spread is only 20 metres at the widest point. To the south the lateral
spread is only 15 metres, and to the north it is a mere 10 metres.

![](media/image1.png){width="4.03200021872266in"
height="5.922606080489939in"}

As deduced in the Preliminary Report, the wrecking scenario unfolds with
first impact on shallow boulders to the east of the main wreck site. The
northeast monsoon wind and waves then drove the partially submerged hull
westwards along a rocky promontory, until it shattered and sank in the
vicinity of the adjacent sandy basin. The ship never 'came to rest'. If
she went down early in the northeast monsoon, which typically lasts from
mid-November until mid-March, she may have been rent asunder within the
one season. If later, she may have survived more or less integral for a
year or so. But it is unlikely that a wooden hull would have survived
intact through two monsoon cycles.

Ceramics stowed in boxes would not have moved far, until the boxes were
smashed or rotted away. Barrels of ceramics could potentially roll along
the seabed, between or even over low-lying boulders. Intact and nearly
intact ceramics found well to the north-northeast imply that this did
occur.

The current regime is discussed in detail in the Preliminary Report. In
short, the bathymetry hinders tide induced currents flowing to the
southwest, but intensifies those flowing to the northeast. During the
northeast monsoon, strong wave-driven oscillatory motion would agitate
the seabed. Spring tide currents in excess of 3 knots would then sweep
mobilised shards to the northeast. On a relatively flat seabed the
spread would have been fan shaped. In the case of the Temasek site, the
bathymetry contained the lateral spread. Shards were constrained to the
sandy basin to the southwest, and then to a series of narrow gullies to
the northeast. Their onward passage was only halted when the increasing
water depth reduced seabed wave action and current speed.

The distribution graph for blue-and-white porcelain shows a
concentration in Grids D11, E11, D12 and E12, corresponding to the sandy
basin, which was referred to by the divers as the Graveyard. Very few
shards were recovered from adjacent Grids D13, E13, D14 and E14, an area
covered mostly by exposed bedrock. In marked contrast, the next three
consecutive Grids, E15, E16 and E17, referred to as the Outer Graveyard,
contained the highest ceramics concentrations. Proceeding further to the
northeast the concentration remains higher than the inshore basin and
only tapers off by Grid E23.

Clearly the pattern is not just the result of waves and current. The
concentrations directly correlate to the depth and area of sediment. The
inshore basin is largely sand, but it is generally less than half a
metre deep. Offshore of the basin the exposed bedrock provides no refuge
for shards. But beyond that there are wide and deep sediment-filled
holes, particularly in Grid E16. With 30 kg of blue-and-white porcelain,
this grid had more than double the next highest grid concentration,
which occurred in the adjoining Grid E15. The deeper sediment continued
to the northeast, but the gently sloping gulley bifurcated and narrowed,
reducing the sediment volume.

The extremely dynamic nature of the site is well demonstrated in Grid
E16, where the maximum depth of sediment was approximately 1.5 metres.
Virtually every shard was coral encrusted, whether exposed on the
surface or lying on the bed rock. Therefore, over the centuries, every
shard has been fully exposed for long enough to be colonised by hard
corals. Plastic debris was found at least a metre under the sediment.
So, during severe weather events it seems the entire sediment layer can
be displaced, even in the deepest pockets.

It may therefore be concluded that ceramic distribution has been
overwhelmingly driven by environmental conditions and bathymetry. The
spatial disposition of ceramics can tell us relatively little about the
initial wrecking process, and it can no longer tell us anything of
stowage patterns.

As a secondary analysis of the wrecking process, the blue-and-white
distribution has also been plotted by shard weight. On a mildly dynamic
wreck site, the heaviest shards would be expected to remain in the
vicinity of the sinking position, while the lightest shards would be
carried the furthest by current and wave action. As it turns out the
distribution by weight is nearly identical to the total distribution.
The heavier shards have been as widely disbursed as the lighter shards.
Therefore, the sinking location cannot be deduced by this means either.

One further check on stowage patterns can be made by investigating the
distribution of different ceramic shapes and decorations. The
distribution of bowls, the most common shape, mirrors the total
distribution, so it would seem that the dynamics of the site once again
obscure the original stowage configuration. Likewise, the distribution
of vases. They are not as widespread as the far more common bowls, but
peak concentrations all occur in the same Grids. Taking the analysis one
step further, when comparing the distribution of bowls decorated with
'ducks in a lotus pond' with bowls decorated with 'lotus bouquets',
there is yet again no discernible difference.

<<insert distribution diagram here>>

**Compositional Analysis**

Fourteen different shapes have been recorded. By far the majority are
bowls, making up 71.5% of the total by weight. Next are vases at 11.1%,
and *guan* (jars) at 9.4%. Note that as this analysis is by weight, the
original number of *guan* would have been far less than the original
number of vases. Dishes are next with 3.7%. Flasks and stem bowls make
up 1.1% and 1% respectively. All other shapes combined account for only
2.2% of the total.

Looking specifically at the two most popular decorations on bowls, there
are three times more 'ducks in a lotus pond' than 'lotus bouquets'. When
considering only bases or base shards, where these decorations occur,
56% of all bowls are decorated with 'ducks in a lotus pond' while 17%
have 'lotus bouquets'.

The most robust element of a bowl is the base, where the footring
provides reinforcement. The total number of intact or nearly intact
bases provides the minimum number of bowls in the original cargo.
Consequently, we know that there were at least 300 blue-and-white bowls
of varying size onboard the *Temasek Wreck*.

In stark contrast there were only nine intact or nearly intact vase
bases. The total number of vase shards suggests at least double that
number of vases, based on an average weight of 700 gm per vase.
Unfortunately, the total weight of shards is not fully representative as
many shards were too small to recover.

The total weight of cover, cup, ewer, jarlet, and stem cup shards
suggests that there were only a handful of each of these shapes in the
cargo. There may have only been one or two bottles, ewers, and pouring
bowls. Note, however, that ewers could only be categorised when spouts
or handles were encountered. Some of the so-called vase shards may have
been from similarly shaped ewers.

  
  **Type** |    **Weight (gms)**   | **Qty of shards**  | **Average weight/shard (g)** |  **% of total weight** 
---|---|---|---|---                            
  Bottle | 754 | 4 | 189 | 0.6%
  Bowl | 92,887 | 1,308 | 71 |71.5%
  Cover | 338 |  21 | 16 | 0.3%
  Cup | 255 | 17 | 15 | 0.2%
  Dish | 4,780 | 47 | 102 | 3.7%
  Ewer | 488 | 24 | 20 | 0.4%
  Flask | 1,430 | 8 | 179 | 1.1%
  Jar/Guan | 12,189 | 67 | 182 | 9.4%
  Jarlet | 426 | 18 | 24 | 0.3%
  Pouring bowl | 65 | 2 | 33 | 0.1%
  Stem bowl | 1,292 | 6 | 215 | 1.0%
  Stem cup | 358 | 8 | 45 | 0.3%
  Unknown | 107 | 1 | 107 | 0.1%
  Vase | 14,471 | 653 | 22 | 11.1%
  **Total** | **129,923** | **2,188** | **100.0%**
  

**Conclusions**

The distribution analysis tells how the long-term wrecking process was
driven by bathymetry and environmental conditions. The distribution has
been so dynamic, however, that it is no longer possible to make a
confident assessment of the wrecking process immediately after impact,
and it is impossible to make any assessment of original cargo stowage
patterns.

The compositional analysis is useful for determining relative quantities
of different ceramic shapes and decorations. A count of bases is more
appropriate for determining minimum quantities of bowls.

By uploading the complete Database it is now possible for researchers to
carry out their own single or multi-level analyses. Potential
permutations are only limited by the imagination.

Every shard has been photographed front and back in high resolution.
With these images included in the Database, more detailed descriptions
are possible for those so inclined. This allows for even higher levels
of statistical analysis or greater insights into shapes and decorations
that are perhaps unique to the blue-and-white porcelain from the
*Temasek Wreck*.

[^1]: Barnes, L.E., 2010, Yuan Dynasty Ceramics, in Zhiyan Li, Bower,
    V., Li He (Eds), Chinese Ceramics: From the Palaeolithic Period
    through the Qing Dynasty, Yale University Press: pp331-386, p.375.

[^2]: https://www.iseas.edu.sg/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/Flecker_TWPS04_Final_r.pdf
